---
layout: post
title: "THE INSIDE STORY"
categories: articles
excerpt: College A place to grow, a place to learn, a place where you come as a rookie and leave as a master.
image: 
  feature: collegelife.jpg
date: 2016-10-25
---

College: A place to grow, a place to learn, a place where you come as a
rookie and leave as a master. The foremost phase of anyone’s life, a
bout of 4 to 5 years where the joy knows no bounds . Every aspect, be it
study or fun , engineering is full of all these.

We all live in a fantasyland created in our dreams where we want to do
everything and get whatever we can and to make those dreams come true we
join colleges. But, my dear friends 4 to 5 years is really a long time
to travel where the perspectives may change.

So, to get an idea about what and how much change takes place in the
journey of becoming an engineer, team IITHeartbeat went out for a survey
and here we are with results.

**Starting with study habits and their involvement in extra curricular
activity…**

Engineers always do smart work and do things in a day for others may
take months to do even when they are embryo-engineer. As the little bit
of daily study habit drops from 25% in first year to 11% in final year
and the ONE NIGHT STAND (last day before exams) increases from 40% in
first year to 52% in final year.

56% of first year students think that the time devoted is not sufficient
but as they reach the end of their engineering journey almost the same
percent of final year students says the time devoted is very much
sufficient.

If they prefer “ONE NIGHT STAND” then, where does rest of the time go?

Yes, you are right ... “DANCING, SINGING, ACTING, JOINING VARIOUS
GROUPS, SPORTS, WRITING, SOCIAL SERVICES, NEVER ENDING POLITICS,
PART-TIME JOB AND MANY MORE-THE EXTRA CIRRICULAR ACTIVITIES”. 71% of
both the first year and the final year students are involved in these.
But, their degree of involvement as VERY INVOLVED increases from 27% in
first year to 40% in final year.

Part-time job is really a good way to earn some extra money and learn
self-reliance and 63% of first year wish to do part-time job but, only
31% till final year converted their “wish to do” into “did” a part-time
job.

We also asked them about trying their hands at entrepreneurship during
college. 51% of first year happily said they will try but only 40% of
final year actually tried their hands.

**Let’s have a look at the “RED HOT-POLITICS” stats…**

Seems like many find the truth that politics is not meant for them and
it’s a game of emotion played by mind keeping emotions far away. As, 12%
in first year increases to 24% who finds politics as a sheer waste of
time and participating in it reduces from 30% in first year to 20% in
final year.

**Let’s see what they have to say about their college life, branch and
college itself….**

There’s hardly any difference in the views of both the first and final
year about their college and branch. Most say they are satisfied with
their college and branch but the red segment of 37% say they wanted some
other branch preferably COMPUTER SCIENCES, APPLIED MATHS, ELECTRICAL AND
MECHANICAL.

The purple segment of 10% in first year and 9% in final year students
says they never wanted to be an engineer. They wanted to be an actor,
singer and sport person.

About their ‘till now‘ experience 23% of both first and final year says
college life is exactly the same what they expected, 47% of first year
and 46% of final year says better than what they expected.

**The post college….**

getting a job becomes their major priority, 23% in first year goes to
37% till final year and majority want a job in their core field. Trying
hands in entrepreneurship increases from 14% in first year to 19% in
final year and few also want to try for competitive exams like CAT,
CIVIL SERVICES, GATE, some wanted to study further and do research.

It’s ok that 18% of first year students haven’t made up their mind about
after college but it’s quiet strange that almost same (17%) final year
students are still to make up their mind about post college life.

At the end we asked them about one of the most important thing that they
will miss about their college, it’s obvious, TIME SPENT WITH FRIENDS but
apart from that we got some amazing answers like LAN FACILITY, THEIR
ACADEMICS AND TEACHERS.

Dear readers,

The story does not terminate here, as we will try to present you about
the last phase of the engineering arena i.e. “THE POST DEGREE” in our
up-coming editions. Till then, best wishes for all the new arrivals and
the departures and keep reading IITHeartbeat (BEATING WITH YOU ALWAYS)….

\*THE ABOVE DATAS WERE BASED ON THE SURVEY AT THE CAMPUS OF IIT ROORKEE
AMONG 200 STUDENTS OF FIRST AND FINAL YEAR STUDENTS. THE DATA MAY VARY
BUT VERY LITTLE FOR DIFERENT COLLEGES.
