---
layout: post
title: "Emerging Branches, Emerging India"
categories: articles
excerpt: In recent years, computer science, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, electronics and communications branches of engineering 
image: 
  feature: branches.jpg
date: 2016-11-16
---
	

In recent years, computer science, mechanical engineering, electrical
engineering, electronics and communications branches of engineering are
happening to be considered as ‘Core’ engineering branches. It is
believed that the students studying other trades have taken those
branches due to their poor JEE scores (though it is true in most of the
cases). It is not the case that these branches are less important than
core branches. The actual problem is poor infrastructure and scarcity of
opportunities in these fields in India. But situation is changing at a
great pace and on wide scale. Sectors such as biotechnology, physics,
and metallurgy are either currently experiencing or are soon going to
experience great boom in research as well as industrial growth.

Let’s have a look at the scope of such emerging branches:

Engineering Physics
-------------------

For many of the intelligent brains present on this planet, physics is
like the soul. It is integrated so deep in their day-to-day life that
they tend to apply physics everywhere they come across. EP is a good
platform for such physics geeks as it is a combined package of classical
and modern physics, mathematics and their engineering applications.
Basically, it is the bridge between engineering and science.

Engineering Physics degree holders from IITs are involved in research
and development activities. Different reputed industries seek students
from this field. Though competition for getting a seat in reputed
college and getting a job is very high, the increasing dependence of
industries on research and innovation is attracting more and more
industries towards this field.

Currently this course is offered by IIT Delhi, IIT Hyderabad, IIT
Bombay, IIT Roorkee, IIT Madras, IIT Guwahati, ISM Dhanbad and IIT BHU.

Biotechnology
-------------

Most of the students in engineering colleges do not consider
biotechnology as engineering. The hatred of maths background people
towards biology seems so obvious but it should be made clear that
biotechnology isn’t same as biology. In this field, you get to study
about genetics, cell biology, cancer biology, immunology, microbiology
etc. In past 15 years different bioinformatics tools have provided
nutrition and revolutionized to this sector. Starting from drug
designing to protein modelling, RNA-DNA fold prediction, mechanism
prediction, now-a-days all the things are visualized by using computer
programmes. This saves a lot of cost, time and also creates new
opportunities for biotechnologists as well as CS engineers. As it is
research mainly oriented branch, you may be placed in different
pharmaceutical, healthcare or seed companies in R&D departments.

Biotechnology course is available at IIT Roorkee, IIT Kharagpur and IIT
Guwahati.

Earth Science
-------------

Have you ever wondered how old is our earth or how was it formed? Many
researchers dedicate their lives to solve this mystery. Geologists or
geoscientists are caretakers of our earth and its natural resources.
They use their knowledge to increase our understanding of processes of
earth and to improve the quality of human life. Earth Sciences have also
close relationship with Geophysics, Geochemistry and Astronomy.

The main emphasis while studying earth sciences is on rocky, aqueous and
gaseous parts of the earth. The subjects which are taught in this
department are palaeontology, structural geology, petrology, ores,
geophysical prospecting etc. It is available at IIT Bombay, IIT
Kharagpur and IIT Roorkee.

Design
------

What is design? What does it consist of? In simple words, design means
blending aesthetics with functionality. Despite of scarce information
and awareness among students about this branch, it has surprised the
engineering students with its placement records which are close to core
branches in premiere institutions. So, what is so special about this
branch?

Basically, design is the heart of every profit or non-profit
organization. Be it website, magazine or any company, designers are
always in demand. Designs of the logos, advertisements, posters,
websites and other things are decided by designers. Different areas to
explore in design are Graphic/Visual design, Interaction Design, Product
design, Industrial design, User Interface design, Automobile design,
Ubiquitous computing, Sound Design, Animation, Photography and
Videography, Motion Graphics, Physical Computing, Gestural User
Interface Design. This course is available at IIT Guwahati, IIT Bombay
for graduation and at IIT Kharagpur, IIT Kanpur for post-graduation.
