---
layout: post
title: "Saathi: A Social Initiative of IITB"
categories: articles
excerpt: IIT Bombay, with a whole lot of boys and just a smattering of girls may well be one of the most unevenly divided campuses we have around. But wait.
image: 
  feature: welcome.jpg
date: 2016-12-14
---


Saathi: A Social Initiative of IITB

IIT Bombay, with a whole lot of boys and just a smattering of girls may
well be one of the most unevenly divided campuses we have around. But
wait. There is even more to it.

Saathi, a one of its kind LGBTQ support group which was set up in IIT
Bombay in mid 2011, advocates for the rights of gender and sexual
minorities of the campus. It serves the needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and questioning students by creating a positive
environment and helping them to come to terms with themselves. According
to a survey, about 4% of the college going population in India is gay
and they are left secluded in perpetual state of anxiety. Saathi aims to
make the college environment comfortable for these minority groups which
are at the receiving end of mockery and ragging. It works to eliminate
heteronormativism, homophobia and gender identity oppression and provide
safe place and counselling to individuals who have faced harassment
because of their sexual orientations. It has voluntary members from
students as well as faculty and holds meetings regularly and has a
mentor programme to sensitize members who further sensitize other
students of the campus. It strives to educate and enhance understanding,
acceptance and awareness regarding LGBTQ issues among the campus
community. Saathi has also advocated for institutional policy changes
and program development that recognizes the needs and rights of lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender individuals. It has also had an impact on
the straight students as they no longer discriminate among students on
this basis. In a country where gays and lesbians have been forced into
the shadows, Saathi has definitely traversed some positive steps.
Initially, the students were hesitant to join the group but over the
years large number of students has come up to support the initiative.
Even the founders of this group expected it to be a niche group but it
has gone a long way and we may soon see such groups in other IITs as
well. The volunteers at Saathi work hard to make us believe that you can
lead a respectable, healthy and successful life even if you are a gay.
We have been indifferent to the LGBTQ community for too long. It’s time
to break the shackles of silence, be a medium of change and Saathi
definitely is a fine example of an initiative of change. The founders of
Saathi proudly and truly quote that “At IIT Bombay, you can be gay and
happy”.
