---
layout: post
title: "Career Options"
categories: articles
excerpt: Clearing JEE Advanced is considered to be gargantuan task and every year lakhs of candidates pull up their socks before appearing for the examination.
image: 
  feature: welcome.jpg
date: 2017-01-09
---


***Career Options***

Clearing JEE Advanced is considered to be gargantuan task and every year
lakhs of candidates pull up their socks before appearing for the
examination. Out of these, around 9000 brilliant minds enter the
hallowed gates of Indian Institute of Technology. The interest they
develop during the four years and the experience they gain, open up the
gates for many career options in front of them. The dilemma of “*whether
I’ll get placed or not??? “*is not a worry to an IITian as he has a wide
range of opportunities knocking at his door.

*Research……..*

Students with a skeptical mind and a want to explore the depths of their
field of interest might find a state of peace by opting for a career in
Research. Innovation is the need of the hour and this need provides an
upper hand to the Research sector compared to other careers. According
to NASSCOM it is expected that by 2020, Engineering Research and
Development industries will touch \$ 40 billion mark. Some of the giant
investors in this sector are Volkswagen, Intel, Microsoft, Toyota,
Johnson & Johnson etc. Certain government organizations like ONGC, ISRO,
DRDO etc. invite engineers from various national institutes to work in
the R&D sector. There are many international programmes, in which
students are provided with the opportunity of pursuing their interest
under the guidance of a faculty at foreign universities. DAAD (German
Academics Exchange Program), MITACS are some of the alternatives to
strengthen one’s research experience.

*Start-ups and Entrepreneurship….*

“*The way to get started is to quit talking and begin doing” - Walt*
Disney.

There are students in IITs who consider the above quote to be a gospel
truth. So, as a matter of fact, they quit talking and open their
startups. Leadership qualities and management skills, along with
exposure to various successful entrepreneurs motivates the beginners to
work hard on their groundbreaking ideas. IITs can boast of gifting the
world some great personalities in the corporate industry including
Bhavish Aggarwal and Ankit Bhati, IIT Bombay graduates who set up one of
the largest network of cabs in India, the OLA cabs. The latest trend
which has come to the fore is gaining experience of startups by doing an
intern in a well established one for an appropriate interval of time and
then using this experience for building up their own. Startups like
Exelixi, started by two IIM graduates, along with other like
Twenty19.com, Myntra, and Drivekool are hiring students for paid
interns.

*Competitive Exams…..*

A large percentage of students, instead of registering for on campus
placements, opt to take up the challenges posed by various competitive
examinations. The students who are interested in joining the Civil
Services apply for Civil Exams like IAS, IPS and IES. Apart from these,
some develop their management and marketing skills and prepare for CAT
(Common Admission Test) with the purpose of getting admission in IIMs
and various other Indian Business colleges. Those who are interested in
pursuing higher education in some of the famous universities of Germany,
US, Great Britain etc. have to pass through the fire of GRE (Graduate
Record Examination). A golden option for the students seeking jobs in
the Public Sector Units (PSUs) is qualifying the GATE (Graduate Aptitude
Test in Engineering). Some big names in the public sector like SAIL,
ONGC, IOCL etc. recruit students on the basis of their score in the GATE
exam.

*Jobs and Placements… *

Although so many other options are available in IITs, but when it comes
to statistics, placements are always the most awe-inspiring ones. There
are a variety of companies that come fetching for talent and this is
where their search ends. Along with major core sector companies like
Qualcomm, a large number of IT companies like Infosys, WIPRO, etc. come
for the placements every year. Technical communication is also one of
the upcoming career alternatives being opted in the past few years.
Here, people breakdown various technical and research progresses in
information pieces about a product or service that is understandable for
the targeted customers. Consultancy Firms are also developing a trend of
picking up students from various IITs and the most notable recruiters
are TCS (TATA Consultancy Firms), Virtusa Consulting Pvt. Ltd and i3
Consulting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
