---
layout: post
title: "Entrepreneurship – Why and How to enter it?"
categories: articles
excerpt: India is currently the 3rd largest start-up community in the world. According to a report by NASSCOM, start-ups have created over 80,000 jobs in the country so far.
image: 
  feature: enterpren.jpg
date: 2017-01-02
---


India is currently the 3rd largest start-up community in the world.
According to a report by NASSCOM, start-ups have created over 80,000
jobs in the country so far. By the end of 2015, they are on a target to
get a whopping \$5 billion (32,558 crores) funding by private equity,
venture capitalists and angel investors.

With our population projected to overtake that of China by 2028, getting
a job – be it private or government – is poised to become a Herculean
task. But, as they say, with challenges comes opportunities. With a
large pool of both skilled and unskilled workforce; and a huge consumer
base, India provides a unique opportunity for start-ups. Realising this,
PM Modi launched a new initiative ’***Start-Up India, Stand-Up India***’
on the last Independence Day. To be executed under the aegis of
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), the initiative
aims to create the next wave of growth by accelerating the development
of start-up ecosystem in the country.

With a vision to take India on the forefront of global entrepreneurship
spectrum, a comprehensive to-do-list is being drawn up by the PMO based
on inputs received from various ministries and departments. The
initiative is currently in a nascent stage and following features have
been proposed till now:

i)  ***Skill Development:*** Govt. aims to set-up specialised Skill
    Development Centres to provide mentorship on skill development.

ii) ***Tax Breaks:*** Learning from the recent success stories of
    start-up booms in San Diego and Denver (ranked 1 and 2 respectively
    in Forbes’ ranking of World’s best places to kick-start new
    start-ups in 2014), government has proposed to exempt new start-ups
    and small scale businesses from paying excise duties and
    service taxes.

iii) ***Incubation Centre:*** Govt. is looking forward to partner with
    premier engineering and management institutes like IITs, IIMs and
    NITs to set-up incubation centres for providing plug and play model
    for start-ups.

iv) ***Easy approval of Loans:*** There are about 1.5 lacs of
    bank-branches in India and the Govt. has proposed that each bank
    will fund at least one start-up. One can only imagine the mega-boom
    it is going to create if executed correctly!

***Fascinating Enough? There’s much more to it***

Every giant leap begins with a small step. For budding entrepreneurs,
taking first few steps are probably the toughest. This is where the
mentorship of an experienced person comes in handy.

Recently,IIT Heartbeat was in touch with one such person, R-Land’s own
product Deepanshu Saini. Deepanshu, a fresh graduate in Mechanical
Engineering, had been active in institute start-up scene since college
days and is looking forward to launch his own idea very soon.

**1. Hello Deepanshu, Tell us about your start-up.**

I am building an app-based platform to make group payments easy and
seamless. This platform will help users avoid **‘I-Owe-You’** situations
and provide options to plan and pay for group events such as parties,
movies, trips and bill payments. We have named it **‘Contree’**. The
development is well on course and I expect to launch a beta version by
mid-December.

**2. Is it necessary to have a completely new idea for a start-up?**

No.

Firstly, there is hardly an idea which is absolutely new these days, the
reason being ideas are basically solutions to existing problems and the
problems are faced by plenty. I remember when **Contree** came to my
mind; I thought I was the first to think of such an idea. But when I
googled for just 15 seconds, I found that there are people who are doing
it already.

Secondly, it is actually good to have ideas on which a little bit of
work have already been done. It validates your idea and gives you more
confidence on building a business around it. If you do manage to find an
absolutely new idea, it can be hard to predict how people will respond
to it. Though, that should not stop one-self from looking for such
ideas.

**3. Tell us about your journey-your first start-up-the mistakes you
made and how you corrected them.**

**‘Solarwaale’** was the first start-up I worked in. It was not my
start-up, but I worked in it from day zero. So, I got to know things
inside out. We have discussed the mistakes that we made many times. Some
of them are:

-   **An unplanned approach** – Lack of planning results in
    under-utilisation of resources and wastage of time. There should be
    a written plan that includes work needed to be done, how and who
    will do it, deadline, approximate cost etc. When you are
    starting-up, you come across hundreds of things which you think can
    be included in your product. If you keep chasing them, your product
    launch may be delayed. Here comes the role of a plan – keeping you
    on track.

-   **Lack of good research** – We started product development from day
    zero, which was wrong. Three types of research are must for a
    product development: industry research, competitor research and
    product & business development research. What happened frequently
    was that we later got to know about a feature our competitor was
    providing and we tried to incorporate it in our product. It led to
    several design and product changes which can frustrate designers
    and coders. If you do the research, you know how the concerned
    market is performing/will perform, and what you can do to add value.
    A good research equals half the work done.

**4. How much time did you invest in thinking of an idea for a start-up
and how much time did it take for its implementation?**

One need not invest time exclusively for thinking of an idea. It never
happens like that. Ideas are solutions to existing problems. Just keep
your eyes and ears open, and observe the problems you and people around
you are facing. Sooner or later, you will find a solution that can be
scaled and turned into a business – a start-up idea is born!

Regarding time, my product is currently under development stage, it will
take about 2 months in development, 15-20 days of launch-cum-buzz
campaign, and when users start using it, we will start pitching to
investors.

**5. For a beginner, probably collecting funds would be most difficult
task. Is it true as per you and how and what did you do while collecting
funds?**

No, it is not true. If your product is web-based, you don’t need that
much money to begin with. Around 3-3.5 lakhs will suffice you for
initial 4-6 months. It includes operational costs (internet, food,
travelling, rent etc.), incorporation cost and initial marketing cost.
According to me, the most difficult task was to build the right team
especially when you are not from coding background. Your contacts help
you in building the right team.

**6. Do you believe in boss-employee culture? Should the final decisions
be taken collectively or individually?**

I won’t call it a boss-employee relationship, but there has to be
someone who takes the responsibility of making final decisions. A
business is not a democracy. There has to be a leader. And by leader, I
mean a ‘leader’, not merely a manager. A leader motivates his team, a
manager need not. Generally, verticals are defined in a company – one
person takes a final call on his vertical – product design, business
development, investment and so on.

**7. If it’s been over say, 6 months, and the idea is not working, then
will you stick to the idea, make changes in it or start thinking on a
new idea?**

Sticking to an idea is a myth. Remember how Facebook started as a
photo-sharing platform. Every start-up modifies the idea as it proceeds,
the reason being that at the time of beginning you are not that much
aware of the market, competitors etc. As you learn about things, you
have to make changes to keep your product relevant and competitive. That
is where a good research can take you miles ahead in the beginning
itself.

Regarding dropping the idea, this decision is taken when your continuous
efforts are not generating the desired revenue over considerable time.
There can be plenty of reasons for this – an immature market, a product
too ahead of time, lack of funds to scale etc. Mentor or advisors play a
crucial role here. They are the people who have ‘been there, done that’.
They can better predict whether to change the boot or the foot.

**IIT Heartbeat** thanks **Mr. Deepanshu** for taking out time from his
busy schedule and sharing his invaluable experience with us. We wish him
all the success in future.
